The sons of an elderly woman who was sexually assaulted in her nursing home are suing the aged care provider, claiming it failed to protect her from a suspected predator.

Key points:

Jessie Jackson's attacker was left in her home for three months after he sexually assaulted her
Her family have spoken out, calling for an overhaul of the system to protect vulnerable elderly people with dementia
Analysis by the ABC shows the rate of reported sexual assaults in aged care is rising, but experts say the real numbers are likely higher as residents with dementia who commit assaults are not recorded
Jessie Jackson, 89, has dementia and was attacked by a male resident as she lay helpless in her recliner at Bupa Woodend, in a regional centre north of Melbourne in June 2018.

Security vision shows how her attacker, Sean Mulcahy, wheeled himself over to Mrs Jackson and put a blanket over her legs before putting his hand into her underwear.

He was interrupted during the attack by a staff member, who raised the alarm.

Mulcahy, a 61-year-old with Parkinson's disease, was in a wheelchair but had no cognitive impairment.

Do you know more about this story? Email investigations@abc.net.au
Mrs Jackson's son Gordon was devastated by the news.

"For this to happen at the end of her life, that's what's really upset me the most," he said.

Mulcahy was charged and convicted of sexual assault later in 2018.

Mrs Jackson's sons are now suing the home because they have information they claim shows Mulcahy had engaged in "inappropriate sexual behaviour" towards two other female residents who were also cognitively impaired.

Bupa's own doctor assessed Mulcahy days after he assaulted Mrs Jackson, saying he was "very purposeful about the victims he has chosen".

According to staff witness statements made to police after the sexual assault of Mrs Jackson, staff knew Sean Mulcahy was a problem because he had sexually harassed them, and had tried to put on pornographic videos.

"I was just in disbelief that this could even happen in a nursing home, and then the more that I found out the more that it went on," Gordon Jackson said.

"I just couldn't believe it that they allowed this to happen."

Sex attacker remains in home with victim

 Mrs Jackson sits in an armchair in the home. Her eyes are half closed.
PHOTO: Jessie Jackson has dementia and severe cognitive impairment. (Supplied)
Mulcahy was found guilty of the sexual assault of Mrs Jackson in October 2018, and put on a sex offenders register.

Her son said he did not understand why, if the witness reports of earlier accounts of alleged inappropriate sexual behaviour were correct, the nursing home failed to act on the complaints.

"It's like leaving a paedophile in a schoolyard," Mr Jackson said.
Mr Jackson was also angered by a decision to allow Mulcahy to stay at the same home after the attack on his mother for more than three months.

Bupa's own doctor wrote a report for police just days after the sexual assault saying:

"I do not think he should be allowed to remain in his current facility, or any residential aged care facility where there are highly vulnerable residents who should expect to be kept safe from the risk of assault."
The doctor's report also said Mulcahy's refusal to take responsibility for his actions made him an "extremely high risk of re-offending".

 Mrs Jackson sits at a table smiling with a man who has his arm around her.
PHOTO: Mrs Jackson's family are devastated by the attack and want systemic change to protect people with dementia. (Supplied)
Bupa declined an interview request, saying due to ongoing legal action they could not comment extensively, but apologised for the incident relating to Mrs Jackson.

"The resident who was charged was moved from our care home once alternative accommodation was found for him," the statement said.

"We have security of tenure obligations to all of our residents under Commonwealth legislation, meaning moving a resident from our care home can be a lengthy and involved process."


EMBED: Sexual assaults in aged care Australia
Spike in aged care sexual assaults

More than 3,700 residents in aged care homes have been sexually assaulted in the past decade in Australia.

Analysis by the ABC shows the rate of reported suspected sexual assaults committed by staff and residents has increased by 65 per cent from 10 years ago.

According to the latest statistics from the Department of Health, 547 incidents of the alleged unlawful sexual contact with residents were reported last year.

But experts say the numbers are likely much higher because those figures only include staff and residents of sound mind — sexual assaults by residents with cognitive impairments like dementia are not counted.

Monash University ageing expert Professor Joseph Ibrahim said this meant reported assaults were not a true reflection of incidents.

He said mandatory reporting of all incidents, including perpetrators with dementia, was needed.

The Government recently announced it is considering an option to make reporting of sexual assaults mandatory.

Ageing and Community Services Australia chief executive Pat Sparrow has argued against mandatory reporting of assault, saying it is ageist.

In a submission to the Australian Law Reform Commission, the peak body said elder abuse should not be treated in the same way as child abuse because:

"It is important that paternalistic and stereotypical views of older people as being frail, dependant and cognitively impaired do not highjack the agenda."
In an interview with the ABC she would not be directly drawn on whether she has changed her position.

"It's a really complex issue that needs to be thought through, there's further consideration being given to all of that now around what reporting is required," Ms Sparrow said.

Professor Ibrahim said this was misguided.

"If you replace the word 'aged' with 'child' there'd be no question about mandatory reporting," he said.

Academic and director of Celebrate Aging, Catherine Barrett, said older victims should not be marginalised.

"It's like imagining that the victim and family are less than human somehow," Dr Barrett said.

"I think that that's one of the problems that we have … we somehow think of older people as less than human, and particularly older women."

